# Datadog Solutions Engineer Exercise
A technical exercise for the Solutions Engineering interview process at Datadog.

Datadog is a cloud-scale monitoring service that creates a single pane of glass
for the metrics and events generated by modern software solutions. Those
solutions can span numerous cloud and service providers with SOA and
micro-service architectures where messaging, queuing, caching, routing, and
service discovery are critical working components. These resources can be
configured and deployed in a host of ways, from containers, to virtual machines,
to bare metal.

Datadog boasts a huge library of integrations that allows customers to get
metrics into their system quickly and easily from almost any source, be it an
application, a database, tooling, a cloud provider, or third party services. And
with an API first approach developers can build custom integrations and push
custom metrics with ease. Even Graphs and Dashboards can be codified!

Datadog doesn't stop there. Real-time interactive dashboards enable customers to
quickly correlate data from all these sources and check the overall health of
their environments. Datadog can be configured to alert customers before
something goes wrong and operations teams can discuss in real-time about what
they are seeing within the dashboard itself. This keeps the context and history
relevant to the metrics at that moment in time.

# Setup an Ubuntu VM
[Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) is a tool for building and managing
virtual machine environments. Vagrant provides easy to configure, reproducible,
and portable work environments built on top of industry-standard technology.

To get started with Vagrant follow the instruction set below:

- [Install Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/installation/) for your
specific operating system.
- [Install VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads); VirtualBox is
a general-purpose full virtualizer for x86 hardware, targeted at server, desktop
and embedded use.
- Clone this repository to your local workstation: `git clone
https://github.com/ckelner/hiring-engineers.git`
- Now run `vagrant up` from your terminal in this directory. This will add an
Ubuntu 12.04 Vagrant Box to your local workstation if you don't have it already.
A Box is simply a base virtual machine image to work with. Vagrant will then
boot a virtual machine using this image and any customizations found in the
`Vagrantfile` in this project. You'll know that it is successful if you see the
message `No Datadog API key found. Make sure 'secrets.yaml' exists. VM will
come up without Datadog agent installed.` -- we will address this in the next
session, but for now that is fine.
- You can SSH into your virtual machine by running `vagrant ssh`; you will see a
message similar to `Welcome to your Vagrant-built virtual machine` and you'll be
dropped to the VM's command prompt.
